# gws_temp
EDA of thermal patterns in gws

This repository tracks the exploratory data analysis and plotting of thermal patterns observed in internal deployments of IMUs in shark stomachs.  These analyses will be presented at BLS6 in Konstanz as well as a peer-review publication. 

Overview:
A variety of marine taxa have evolved the ability to elevate body temperature above ambient conditions (endothermy), a trait that improves the rates of many vital physiological processes and allows animals to operate effectively across a range of thermal conditions, thereby expanding their niche. Understanding of internal stomach and core temperatures and thermoregulatory patterns provides insight into animal behavior, energetics, and digestive processes.  White sharks (Carcharodon carcharias) are large-bodied endothermic predators that have been hypothesized to be functionally homeothermic. We fed data loggers that record depth, acceleration and internal stomach temperature to free-swimming adult sharks in order to understand species-specific patterns in internal temperature regulation and digestive behavior. We recorded a total of 1208 hours of depth and temperature data from 9 different individuals, with deployments lasting from 48 to 284 hours. Mean stomach temperatures (25.5 ± 1.4 C) matched internal temperatures reported in the literature. However, we found greater intra- and inter-individual variability than reported in the literature with one individual exhibiting a range of 7.5 C over 90 hours and differences of 2.5 C between individuals' means. This large variability makes identification of heat increments of feeding in the wild problematic; however stomach temperatures in 5 sharks peaked within 24 hours of ingesting the bait-wrapped tag.  High frequency variations (<0.5C) in stomach temperatures were correlated with accelerations, indicative of possible digestive movements exposing the tag to thermal heterogeneity in the stomach.  Results suggest there is greater variability in stomach temperature than previously acknowledged, yet, further work is necessary to understand the drivers of stomach thermal dynamics in white sharks and other endothermic sharks and fishes.